# plucked-string-waveguide
This is a [digital waveguide model](https://llllllll.co/uploads/short-url/beKGony8hlPZBQtLxhm8E5KeCNe.pdf) of a plucked, vibrating string. Developed by Tarun Nalluri. You can copy and paste the raw code from the .dsp file into the online [FaustIDE](https://faustide.grame.fr/) to play the polyphonic instrument with a computer keyboard or even a MIDI keyboard and a browser that supports webMIDI (such as Firefox, Opera, Edge or Chrome). Born from an intense love for musical acoustics, this project is the first in my exploration of this area of applied mathematics and signal processing. No AI/LLM assistance was used in developing this program.

At each time sample _n_, the algorithm's output signal, _y(n)_, is the current input signal, _x(n)_ — usually a burst of noise upon a key press — summed with the output from a previous point in time, _y(n - L)_. So _y(n) = x(n) + y(n - L)_, where _y(n - L)_ is the prior output from _L_ time samples ago. The value of _L_ determines delay duration and therefore perceived pitch. It is a simplified model of string displacement waves that propagate from the plucked point of the string, and then travel down the length of the string and back to the pluck/listening point. Delay length corresponds to string length. During each round trip, the traveling signal is attenuated by a filter whose coefficients correspond to physical parameters of the string that players can tweak in real-time!

There are two papers I referenced heavily to write this digital waveguide. The core string model and filter coefficient derivation is from [Combining digital waveguide and functional transformation methods for physical modeling of musical instruments](https://home.mit.bme.hu/~bank/publist/aes22.pdf), by Lutz Trautmann et al. The mixing and balancing of the two string polarizations models is derived from [Plucked-String Models: From the Karplus-Strong Algorithm to Digital Waveguides and Beyond](https://www.jstor.org/stable/3681155?origin=crossref), by Matti Karjalainen et al. I especially thank a great online physicist friend I met on the PureData Discord server for helping me understand the first paper, especially for pointing out a crucial typo in one of their equations.
